# The Great Britain

## Built 1839-43, Maiden Voyage 1845, Operational 1845-86 [still extant, Bristol]

The *Great Britain* was the first ocean-going steamship to be built from metal, and the first ocean-going ship to be driven by a propeller.  It entered service on the 27th of September 1845, and was built in Bristol, England, by a coalition of investors and engineers centred around Isambard Kingdom Brunel.  The *Great Britain* is 322 feet long, and when launched weighed 3,443 tons loaded, carried 1,200 tons of coal, up to 500 tons of cargo and, for most of its operational life, around 600 passengers[1].   When first launched, the ship carried first-class passengers to New York (1845-6, and occasionally thereafter) and at the end of its life, in the 1880s, stripped of its engines, carried cargo to and from San Francisco, whilst on two occasions in the 1850s it carried military troops to Crimea and India.  For most of its working life, however (1852-1876) it shipped emigrants and cargo between Britain and Australia, as the fastest vessel engaged in that trade.  The *Great Britain* provided the basic prototype for fast, engine-powered, high volume transport of people and cargo across the oceans, a key feature in the transformation of the 19th century world.  With improving engine efficiencies and materials (from iron to steel), the metal-hulled screw-steamer then became, by the close of the 19th century, the widespread model for oceanic shipping of all kinds.  

Prior to the *Great Britain*, ocean-going steam ships were wooden vessels, moved through the water by paddle wheels at their sides.  They were used exclusively for higher-class passage fares, due to their limited internal capacity, and for fast mail transfer on the Atlantic.  The first vessel in this vanguard was the *Great Western* steamship, built in 1838 by the Great Western Steam Ship Company [GWSSCo.], who would also build the *Great Britain*.  Correspondingly, prior to the *Great Britain*, oceanic migration, beginning to gather pace between Europe, the Americas and Australasia, was confined to slow sailing vessels in what was, due its difficulty, length and discomfort, very commonly a one-way passage.  Within a decade of the *Great Britain*’s emergence, steam and migration began to converge, making faster global transit widely accessible, transforming patterns of international work, travel and economy.  This transformative function, however, was not the intention of, or benefit derived from, those who built the pioneering ship.  Following the success of the *Great Western*, the directors of the GWSSCo. had hoped for a second identical or slightly enlarged wooden paddle steamer.  

Changes in the planning for a second GWSSCo. vessel emerged before construction began.  In October 1838, the iron coasting ship *Rainbow* visited Bristol, giving the GWSSCo. building committee a chance to inspect the material.  In March 1839 it was announced that the company’s new vessel would be of iron[2].  In May 1840, Bristol was then visited by the experimental ship *Archimedes*, built to demonstrate the newly patented positioning of a propeller below the waterline.  Again, the building committee investigated, and in December 1840, Brunel persuaded the GWSSCo. to convert its new vessel to this form of propulsion[3].   These changes were expensive.  Timber had already been ordered in 1838 for the planned paddle steamer, and constructing in iron was a tedious process, as Bristol had no hinterland able to provide the material.  It instead arrived in slow, low quantities from the English Midlands[4].   By the time the argument was made for a propeller, engine construction for a paddle-wheeled ship was already advanced.  The changes that eventually created the *Great Britain*’s form proved financially fatal to the GWSSCo., but in the process, created the basic technological prototype for high capacity, mechanized deep-sea shipping.

Throughout the construction of the *Great Britain*, a far wider community of engineers and external patronage was consulted than for the *Great Western*, because of the novelty of its design.  Core individuals remained, although in smaller roles.  William Patterson, who had received the contract to build the hull of the *Great Western* at his Bristol yard, superintended construction of the *Great Britain*’s hull at a newly cut drydock for the GWSSCo..  When plans for a paddle engine were scrapped, Joshua Field built the ships’ propeller engine to Brunel’s design.  From the outset, Isambard Kingdom Brunel adopted a much more significant role, and consulted with many more engineers than with the *Great Western*, a fact reflected in the central role the source material attributes him in *Brunel’s Network*.  Brunel corresponded with associates such as William Fairbairn and Bryan Donkin on issues of iron construction and engine matters, whilst working closely with members of the Royal Navy to gain access to its enquiry into propeller-driven ships.  Brunel was successful in this, and invited to superintend Naval propeller trials, which he used to refine his own ideas for the *Great Britain*[5].   Brunel also used his own background in civil engineering to devise structural design elements such as a longitudinal box-girder frame for the vessel floor, which gave immense size and strength[6].   When complete, the *Great Britain* was the product of a community of innovation.  Orchestrated by Brunel, it brought together emerging and novel concepts on a grand scale to provide a compound leap in naval architecture.  Its size (322 ft, 3,443 tons) far exceeded anything practicably possible in wood, and the propeller a more efficient method of movement than paddle wheels, being always completely submerged, whilst theoretically allowing more internal space.

Advantages such as these, however, were not realised when the ship was first launched.  Despite designing the prototype for mechanized mass-transfer, Brunel and the GWSSCo. were unable to envisage steam navigation beyond high class cabin travel, in limited number.  To ensure a smooth and quiet journey for such clientele, a huge gear-and-chain mechanism was installed to reduce engine noise, taking up significant internal space.  With low passenger capacity, the ship was run four times to New York, each time at a loss, suffering technical difficulties on route, before becoming stranded on an Irish beach [Dundrum Bay], in September 1846.  This event pushed the GWSSCo. out of business.  The *Great Britain* was then purchased by two of its original investors and re-engineered as an emigrant ship.  A new engine, by John Penn, with direct-acting gears, was dropped low in the hold, and passenger capacity increased from 252 to a maximum of 730[7].  The first emigrant voyage to Australia took place in 1852[\*]. The era of mass transportation in large, spacious iron screw steamers was beginning, having a major effect on global demography for the rest of the century. The *Great Britain* proved peerless in the Australian trade, using its combination of engine, traditional rigging and huge capacity to remain competitive and profitable until the 1870s, with no other steam ships proving as durable on that route until engine advances in the 1880s.

By that stage, the age of the ship prevented further passenger use, and it took bulk cargo to California from 1882, running into trouble around Cape Horn in 1886.  Requiring repairs too costly to service, the ship was left in the Falkland Islands until 1970, when a salvage effort returned it to Bristol and into the dry dock where it was constructed.  Fully restored, the ship can be viewed there today.


[*] This was a signal year, as the *City of Glasgow*, a large iron screw steamer built for cabin passengers in 1850, was also re-purposed in 1852 for the Atlantic emigrant business, proving profitable on that run.  In 1847, the *Sarah Sands* iron screw steamer had joined Atlantic service but was re-routed to Australia in 1851 for general cargo, emigrants and tramping, and in 1850, the *Helena Sloman* iron screw entered emigrant service between Hamburg and New York, only lasting 3 voyages. 

-------------------------------------

## Further Reading

As a general introduction to the ships construction and the experience of some of those who travelled on it, Helen Doe, *SS Great Britain: Brunel’s Ship, Her Voyages, Passengers and Crew* Stroud, 2019.

A general repository of statistics about the ships construction and life can be found in Ewan Corlett, *The Iron Ship Bristol*, 2012.

The best overall technical description of the *Great Britain*’s planning, building and impact on the GWSSCo., as well as Brunel’s role in delivery and development of the propeller, is found in Andrew Lambert, Dennis Griffiths, Fred Walker, *Brunel’s Ships* London, 1999, esp. pp. 27-52, 63-75, 76-90, 127-36.

An objective assessment of where the novel innovations in the *Great Britain* fit within the technical history of naval architecture can be found in Paul Quinn, ‘IK Brunel’s Ships – First Among Equals?’ *The International Journal of the History of Engineering and Technology* 80, 2010, pp.80-99.

The story of the ships return to Bristol is told in Chris Young, *The Incredible Journey* Bristol, 2010.

--------------------------

1. Isambard Brunel (jr.), *The Life of Isambard Kingdom Brunel, Civil Engineer London*, 1870 (Stroud, reprint 2006 widely available) pp.209-10.
2. Lambert et al. pp.63-4.
3. Ibid., pp.33-9.
4.  Quinn ‘Brunel’s Ships’ pp. 80-99.
5.  Lambert et al. pp.33-49.
6.  Quinn ‘Brunel’s Ships’ pp. 80-99.
7.  Doe, *Great Britain* p.42, p.87.

