# Brunel's Network

## A partnership between the **SS Great Britain** and the **University of Bristol**

*Brunel’s Network* is a project that has begun to map and visually represent the working relationships and professional connections behind the major marine engineering projects conducted by Isambard Kingdom Brunel.  These projects were the *Great Western* steam ship, the first purpose-built ocean-going steamship, [launched in 1838] the *Great Britain* steam ship, the first ocean-going ship built of iron, and driven by a propeller [launched 1845] and the *Great Eastern* steamship, the largest vessel built in the 19th century, which laid the first continuous, operating length of telegraph cable between Europe and North America [launched 1860].

This project seeks to evaluate the relationships between, and contributions made by the individuals involved in creating these vessels. It helps us to understand communities of innovation in the Victorian era, and how they coalesced to create advances in both technology and global interconnection.

The imagery in *Brunel’s network* is made up of people (‘nodes’) and lines between them (‘edges’). The nodes are all the individuals mentioned in contemporary documents detailing the planning, financing and construction of the vessels. The size of a given person represents the significance of their input to the project.  This is calculated by a scoring system derived from contextual evidence in the contemporary documents.  For example, designing or building the engines or hull of a vessel is a higher scoring input than supplying wood or paintings for cabins; an individual recommending another engineer whose advice is used on the project scores better than an individual who provides no additional input or connections.  The aggregate of a persons score in this data model determines their size in the network.  Lines between people represent social or professional connections that existed between individuals prior to, and during, the build of each vessel.  Each line is also derived from contemporary sources, in this case those showing prior and/or ongoing interactions.

The viewer can change the imagery in many ways in order to explore the people and dynamics of the network.  Clicking on an individual will highlight them, and both their size and extent of their connections within the project become clear. Double clicking will provide further options for more information.  The network can be re-ordered as a traditional social network, in which the connectivity of people determines their position, or as a network of influence, determined by the importance of each individual to the project.  It is also possible to view as yet unconnected people, as well as those who offered input to the projects which was not taken up.

These viewing options help us understand the working dynamics behind these complex engineering projects.  For example, some individuals may have had major technical significance, but little prior connection to others in the group, in which case, the role of the individual(s) who brought them into the project was strategically major. A good example of this is Joshua Field, crucially important to the *Great Western* steam ship, for whom Isambard Kingdom Brunel provided the link which drew Field into the project.  With analyses such as these, it is possible to examine the social and professional dynamics that underpinned these key maritime technologies, to assess where and how funding and patronage was sought, and to gain an insight into Brunel’s engineering role in each project, which increased significantly with each ship.

The imagery was built using Python to process the underlying data sets into a data model. This was mapped into Javascript, with rendering achieved using a combination of React and D3. All of the Python and Javascript source code is available on GitHub, and is Open Source (MIT License).

The project continues to add individuals and further interrogate the connections between them as more archival material around the United Kingdom becomes available, and hopes to be a principal resource for engineering, scientific and business history, as well as an example of best practice in the Digital Humanities for exploring historical communities of innovation.