# The Great Eastern

## Built 1854-59, Maiden Voyage 1860, Operational 1860-71

The *Great Eastern* steam ship was the largest ship built in the 19th century.  It was an ocean-going steam ship, driven by paddle wheels and a propeller, made of iron, and 680 ft in length, weighing 18,914 tonnes[1].   It was designed to carry emigrants and cargo to Australia, and built in London, England, by a coalition of engineers and investors centred around Isambard Kingdom Brunel.  The ship never operated in the trade it was built to serve.  It instead entered service in June 1860 in the Liverpool-New York passenger trade, in which it operated for three years.  In 1865 it was converted to lay telegraph cable, being the only vessel in the world massive enough to carry a continuous length of cable from Europe to North America.  In 1866, it laid the first continuingly operating cable between the two continents and worked until 1870 laying further marine telegraph connections around the globe, thus playing a crucial role in connecting the first global system of electronic communications.  After 1871, the ship could not find employment in any further trades, and served variously as a floating showcase and warehouse, before being broken up in 1889.

The objective of the *Great Eastern* design was to achieve super long-distance, non-stop ocean steaming between Britain and Australia.  The ship was designed and planned by Isambard Kingdom Brunel between 1852 and 1854, at a time when the question and feasibility of steaming to Australia occupied both the British government and the country’s shipping industry[2].   In 1851, Brunel assisted the Australian Mail Company, [AMC] as consulting engineer, by designing two steam ships to carry mail to Australia via the Cape of Good Hope, where they would refuel.  These ships were built for the AMC by John Scott Russell, a London-based ship builder[3].   Brunel then began to privately record sketches and calculations for a vessel that could reach Australia with a full complement of out and return coals.  Brunel’s plans for the accordingly enormous ship, needing 10,000 tons of fuel, were taken up by the Eastern Steam Navigation Co., [ESN] which had recently raised investment capital for Australian steam shipping, but lost a planned bid for government mail carriage.  John Scott Russell was selected to build the ship at his yard in Millwall. Russell’s firm was also selected to build the paddle engines for the ship, and James Watt & Co., of Birmingham, the engine for the propeller.  The reason for adopting both paddles and a propeller [screw], often cited as resulting from a lack of contemporary engine power to drive a powerful enough screw (or potentially twin screws) appears to have been to allow the ship to dock in harbours of shallow draft, where the paddle wheels offered greater manoeuvrability[4]. 

In order to achieve necessary size and structural integrity, converge different systems of propulsion, and deal with issues of navigation, steering and ships handling on an unprecedented scale, Brunel consulted with a very large and diverse array of engineers and scientists across the United Kingdom, as well as receiving huge volumes of unsolicited suggestions from the scientific community.  The size, complexity and extent of communication around the *Great Eastern* is reflected in *Brunel’s Network* where the number of engineers involved is significantly larger than for either Brunel’s *Great Britain* or for the *Great Western*.  Moreover, because Brunel insisted on direct control of all engineering matters involved with the *Great Eastern*, the extent of his connections within the network far exceeds those recorded for either the *Great Western* or *Great Britain*.  The breadth of expertise among the individuals is also more significant.  Whilst Brunel continued to consult individuals such as Joshua Field, William Fairbairn, William Patterson and Christopher Claxton regarding the *Great Eastern* (alongside additional marine engineers, such as Edward Humphrys and John Penn), he also closely corresponded with the Astronomer Royal, G. B. Airey, various makers of scientific instruments of observation and a vast number of suppliers of all kinds.  In transiting to and from Australia, Brunel planned the vessel to have an on-deck observatory, thereby improving astronomical and navigational knowledge, as well as global transportation.  The ship was seen as a scientific and engineering system, and in order to deliver this concept, Brunel also led the selection of captains and on-board engineers.  In these extensive and often intense interactions, Brunel’s relationships with those closest to the project became fraught to the point of collapse, as was the case with ESN secretary John Yates, engine manufacturer Henry Wollaston Blake of Watt & Co. and principal contractor John Scott Russell.

When finished, the ship both adopted and pioneered many lasting innovations in naval architecture.  These included ‘transverse bulkheads’, or compartments that separated the inside of the ship into sections, in order to prevent flooding in case of a leak; a double skin, giving the ship protection from underwater collisions (of which there was one severe incident); and novel ‘cellular’ framing, or iron girder framework along the bottom of the hull and along the top, just below the deck.  Whereas the first two measures provided safety, the latter provided massive longitudinal strength. The double frame, at the top and bottom of the ship, provided rigidity that prevented very large vessels from sagging under their own weight when lifted by waves or experiencing storm weather, and would become a crucial feature in allowing ocean liners to continually increase in size over the century.  All such designs were in line with structural and civil engineering skills.  As well as many superfluous suggestions from other engineers and the public, the ship also attracted the attention of several emerging technologies – most significantly offers of electrical communication and lighting on board, and the use of steel for major component parts – which would each have been revolutionary.  However, the egregious cost and risk in delivering the vessel caused Brunel to reject such suggestions on account of their novelty.

Throughout construction, the ESN and Brunel never seriously reviewed the commercial potential or operating framework for the *Great Eastern*, the planning and construction of which effectively became an end in itself.  Neither Australia nor India, another potential colonial market, were discussed in detail once construction began.  From 1854 it appears that the USA (Portland, Maine) was the only region for which arrangements were made, although enquiries were also made about Richmond, Virginia, and for Milford Haven as a point of departure.  None were linked to international trade, but Portland and Milford Haven had connections to rail investors in the *Great Eastern*.  The ship was eventually sent to New York in hope of procuring maximum trade, and was never sent to Australia.  Alongside poor commercial management, the belief that size could solve super-long distance steaming was incorrect, with engine efficiency proving the correct solution in 1865[\*]. The cost of the ship meant that the ESN was bankrupted before it was finished, and a new firm, the Great Ship Company [GSC] formed to launch and operate it[5].   After putting to sea unfinished in 1860 (only 1,500 of 4,000 passenger births were completed) the ship operated between Liverpool-New York, suffering both storm damage and a hull-tear on separate incidents, although it did make one voyage at 1,500 capacity[6].   However, the cost in fuelling, provisioning and repair of the ship rendered it unprofitable, and in 1864, Daniel Gooch, a director of the GSC, purchased the vessel and converted it to a cable layer[\*\*].  It was in this guise, servicing the first major spread of electrical global communication, as well as its place in Victorian culture, that the ship left its greatest impact[\*\*\*].

* [\*] This was achieved by the SS *Agamemnon*, built and operated by Alfred Holt, who sardonically remarked in 1877 that ‘considering Mr Brunel’s genius and the flow of capital his designs attracted, his only wonder [about the *Great Eastern*] was that she was so small’[7]. 
* [\*\*] This role had been muted for the vessel since its building phase, as the principal manufacturer of marine telegraph cable lay on the opposite bank of the Thames to the *Great Eastern*’s yard.
* [\*\*\*] The ship was symbolic in terms of both imperial and technological power, and became a popularized and literary symbol, dramatized by Jules Verne in *A Floating City*. 
    
-----------------------

## Further Reading

The cultural impact of the *Great Eastern* is discussed at length in Douglas R. Burgess, *Engines of Empire: Steam Ships & the Victorian Imagination* Stanford, 2016, esp. pp.60-91.

A concise and complete account of the *Great Eastern*’s conception, build, launch and career is given in George S. Emmerson, *The Greatest Iron Ship: SS Great Eastern* Newton Abbot, 1981.

Further exploration of the *Great Eastern*’s cultural impact is Edward Gillin, ‘Prophets of progress:  Authority in the scientific projections and realizations of the Great Eastern steam ship’ *Technology & Culture* 56, 2015, pp.928-56

The best technical description of the *Great Eastern*’s construction is found in Andrew Lambert, Dennis Griffiths, Fred Walker, *Brunel’s Ships* London, 1999, esp. pp.137-53.

The contemporary question of coal consumption, engine development and importance of efficiency over size in long distance steaming with regards the *Great Eastern* is discussed in Ben Marsden, Crosby Smith *Engineering Empires: A Cultural History of Technology in 19th Century Britain* Cambridge, 2005, esp. pp.112-128.

-----------------------

1. Emmerson *Great Eastern* p.157.
2. Contemporary articles and discussion on this matter is held in National Maritime Museum Caird Library and Archive TRNISM/5 ‘Articles relating to Transatlantic and Australian Packet services’.
3. These ships were the 3,000t iron screw steamers *Victoria & Adelaide*.  See Lambert et al. p.137.
4. Ibid. p. 138.
5. Emmerson, *Great Eastern* pp.34-49.
6. Burgess, *Engines* pp.80.
7. Marsden, Smith, *Engineering Empires* p.127.
8. Burgess, *Engines* pp.82-5.

