# The Great Western

## Built 1836-7, Maiden Voyage 1838, Operational 1838-1856

The *Great Western* was the first purpose-built ocean-going steam ship. It entered service on the 8th of April 1838, shortening the Atlantic crossing between Britain and the United States from 5-6 weeks to 14 days.  The ship was built in Bristol, England, by a coalition of investors and engineers associated with Isambard Kingdom Brunel.  The ship was 236 feet long, weighed 1,340 tonnes, carried 600 tons of coal, 250 tonnes of cargo and 120 passengers[1].   It was driven by paddle wheels at its sides, and its wooden hull was reinforced internally with iron[*].  From 1838-1846 it provided a regular passenger service between Britain and New York, and from 1847-1855 operated as a mail carrier between Britain, the Caribbean and South America for the Royal Mail Steam Packet service [RMSP].  The ship proved the technical and commercial viability of ocean steam navigation, and its entry into service was the beginning of a historic revolution in human trade, communication and exchange.  In the most obvious and narrow sense, the ships successful engineering marked the first point when arrival times in international shipping could be calculated based on engine power and fuel supply, rather than left to vagaries of weather.  In a much larger sense, it signalled the moment that oceanic trade and contact, governed throughout human history by meteorology, began to be detached from natural restraints.

Prior to the *Great Western*, steam vessels were built for coastal and river trades.  The immediate success of the *Great Western* as an oceanic vessel was due to the configuration of people who came together to design, engineer, construct and fund the vessel, who are each represented in *Brunel’s Network*.  The origins of the ship lay with the Bristol directors of the Great Western Railway [GWR].  The decision to build the ship was made after two key incidents in October 1835.  In that month, the GWR received Royal Assent to build a continuous railway line between Bristol and London, and a prospectus also appeared detailing a new Atlantic steam shipping firm, the British & American Steam Navigation Company [B&A], registered in London.  In response, at the October 1835 board meeting of the GWR, Thomas Guppy, the original progenitor of the GWR, and the GWR’s chief engineer, Isambard Kingdom Brunel, advocated a Bristol-based Atlantic steam fleet, which would link up with the railway line, and thus connect London and New York by steam[**].  The Bristol investors were supportive, becoming the chief backers of the newly formed Great Western Steamship Company [GWSSCo.].  

Between them, the Bristol backers and Brunel then brought together a uniquely proficient and skilled group to construct the company’s first vessel.  For the construction of the hull, the directors chose William Patterson, who owned a shipyard on the Bristol waterfront, and had long built large merchant sailing ships for the city’s traders, as well as early paddle steaming ships for local Irish trade. Moreover, Patterson was open to innovation.  He accommodated design concepts – most significantly the iron reinforcing of the hull – which were provided by Oliver Laing, chief shipwright of the Royal Navy, and which proved key to the vessel’s success.  For the ship’s machinery, Brunel urged the directors to select Joshua Field, of Maudslay, Sons & Field.  Field was chosen to build the engines, boilers and furnaces, with engine construction super-intended by the London-based Brunel.  Field was at the leading edge of marine engineering, being the chief engine builder for the Royal Navy, and well known to all those who were developing new efficiencies in marine propulsion.  His ability to deliver cutting-edge, efficient, powerful engines on time ensured that the *Great Western* was complete before any B&A vessels.  Alongside the innovative hull, his engineering ensured that the vessel enjoyed an enormously successful and durable career.

Because the vessel was prepared and ready for launch prior to any B&A vessels, the proprietor of B&A, Junius Smith, famously procured an Irish packet steamer to send across the Atlantic prior to the *Great Western*, and thereby claim the first Atlantic crossing under steam.  The ship procured, the *Sirius*, was stripped out to provide fuel capacity, and left four days before the *Great Western*, on April 4th, 1838.  However, both ships arrived just 12 hours apart, on the evening and mornings of the 22nd and 23rd of April, with the *Sirius* arriving first, having spent all of its fuel. The *Great Western*, crossing nearly four days faster, had 196 tons of fuel remaining, and proved the concept of Atlantic steam navigation[2]. 

After its debut, the *Great Western* settled into a steady and regular timetable of Atlantic crossing, becoming the first steam vessel to do so.  For almost 10 years, it carried passengers on behalf of the GWSSCo. between Britain and New York.  From 1838-43 it did so from Bristol, then from late 1843-46, it did so from Liverpool.  This latter step was designed to retain passenger numbers.  The move recognised that Liverpool – not Bristol – was the core of North Atlantic trade, and that the ship needed high passenger numbers to compete with the growing Cunard Line[3].   The ship was then sold in 1846 because the GWSSCo. was driven to bankruptcy by its second vessel, the *Great Britain*[4].   From 1847, the *Great Western* entered service for the Royal Mail.  It serviced the Caribbean and South American route of the RMSP until 1855, when it was requisitioned for service in the Crimean War.  Upon its return in 1856, it was finally broken up.  The ship had crossed the Atlantic 65 times, sailed more than a million miles and carried more than ten thousand passengers between Europe and the Americas[5][***].  Although it was eventually provided with new engines by the RMSP, its long standing success was owed to its immensely strong and well-constructed framing and hull, and the outstanding years of performance from its initial machinery at a time when Atlantic steam crossing was a novel and unproven concept.  Indeed, the proof of concept that the *Great Western* provided would be the blueprint for the first generation of fleets of which it was both a competitor and member.

[*] ‘Side-wheelers’ differed from ‘rear-wheelers’, often seen in American riverways and coastal waters.

[**] After launching the vessel, the GWSSCo. Annual Report remarked that ‘the best Thanks of the Meeting are due to Thomas Richard Guppy, esq, the original Projector of this Undertaking’[6].  Isambard Kingdom Brunel’s son, Isambard Jr, claimed that the idea of the ship was his fathers in an 1870 biography.  It seems most likely that Guppy, with a personal history in transatlantic trade with New York and as the core advocate for steam links in Bristol, was the progenitor of the idea, and the enthusiastic Brunel his most vociferous advocate.  In keeping with the evidence of contemporary, rather than subsequent credit, in Brunel’s Network it is Guppy who is credited as progenitor.  

[***] 10,525 [81 per voyage]

---------------------

## Further Reading

On the cultural impact of the vessel, as well as contemporary awareness of ‘annihilating space’ between Europe and North America among non-European peoples, Douglas R. Burgess, *Engines of Empire: Steam Ships & the Victorian Imagination* Stanford, 2016, esp. pp.1-42.

For the first voyage and background context of the vessel, including planning in Bristol prior to 1835: Christopher Claxton, *The Logs of the First Voyage, Made with the Unceasing Aid of Steam, Between England and America, by the Great Western of Bristol, Lieut. James Hosken, RN, Commander Bristol*, 1838 [British Library reprint, 2011, widely available].

As a general introduction: Helen Doe, *The First Atlantic Liner: Brunel’s Great Western Steamship* Stroud, 2017.

For technical and all voyage information of the ships career, including RMSP: Dennis Griffiths, *Brunel’s Great Western* Wellingborough, 1985.

For further company and technical info of the ship and GWSSCo: Andrew Lambert, Dennis Griffiths, Fred Walker, *Brunel’s Ships* London, 1999, esp. pp.15-27, 91-104.

---------------------------

1. Griffiths, *Great Western* 147.
2. Claxton, *Logs of the First Voyage*
3. Griffiths, *Great Western* pp. 87-98.
4. Doe, *Great Western*; Lambert, Griffiths, Walker, *Brunel’s Ships* pp.83-88.
5. Griffiths, *Great Western* pp.141-5.
6. DM1758/9/2/1 [Brunel Institute]
